You have been told that you need heart surgery.
This information is to help prepare you for the surgery
and help you make lifestyle changes to improve your health
It is not intended to replace medical advice
and any information or instruction you receive from your physician.
Your surgeon has discussed with you and your family
the surgical procedure you will need.
Risks and complications
are dependent on many factors
and your doctor will discuss these with you before surgery.
By signing the consent forms
you are consenting to the procedure
including the possible risks and complications.
Therefore, it is important to have your personal affairs in order
and advanced directives.
In the event you do have an unexpected complication
or prolonged hospital stay.
If you are taking blood thinning medicines,
they may need to be stopped before surgery.
Low doses of aspirin are not usually stopped.
Ask your surgeon if you should take
your current medicines before arrival.
If you smoke,
You should try very hard to quit before surgery.
Stop taking herbal supplements
and over-the-counter medications
unless they are approved by your surgeon.
Discharge planning begins before you were admitted.
Plan to have someone with you for the first week at home.
A visiting nurse may be ordered to check on you
to assess your lungs, incision, blood pressure and oxygen levels.
If physical therapy or more extensive assistance is needed
A rehabilitation facility
or skilled nursing facility may be needed.
Some of these tests will be done before surgery:
blood work
blood typing
You will not be allowed to donate your own blood
before surgery.
Because of the danger of being anemic going into surgery.
chest x-ray
carotid ultrasound to assess blood flow in the carotid arteries.
Ultrasound of leg or arms to evaluate blood vessels.
electrocardiogram (EKG)
Pulmonary function tests, to test the condition of the lungs.
You will arrive at the hospital at the designated time.
Usually two hours prior to surgery.
intravenous lines for medicine
or blood transfusions are started.
After you are given anesthesia in the operating room,
an arterial line to monitor blood pressure and draw blood samples
and a large intravenous line in your neck will be placed.
A catheter will also be placed in your bladder.
There is a specialized team of nurses,
anesthesiologists, perfusionists,
and technicians that will be caring for you.
heart surgery requires an incision made vertically
down the center of your chest and the breast bone.
To allow the surgeon to reach your heart.
A heart-lung machine is necessary for heart surgery.
The heart-lung machine or cardiopulmonary bypass machine,
takes over the function of the heart and lungs
while the heart is at rest.
Blood flows from the heart to the machine
where oxygen is added
and then the blood is pumped back to the body.
When the surgery is finished,
the heart-lung machine support is gradually
reduced as your heart takes over the pumping of blood.
Your family will wait for you in a special waiting room
during the surgery.
Nurses will communicate with your family
and keep them informed about how you are doing.
After surgery you will go to the intensive care unit.
You will have a breathing tube
which will be taken out as early as possible
and usually within a few hours after surgery.
A nurse is always near you during this time.
You will have drainage tubes in the chest
to drain blood and fluids.
IVs, temporary pacemaker wires,
a tube to drain your stomach
and a catheter in your bladder.
Your blood pressure and heart rhythm will be continuously monitored.
When you are ready
you will be transferred out of ICU.
Breathing exercises and walking
to prevent complications such as pneumonia and blood clots
are very important at this time.
The sternum (breast bone)
is closed using wires and requires several weeks to heal.
You will be taught how to avoid lifting
and pulling with your arms during this time.
You will be ready for discharge
when your blood pressure and heart rhythm are stable,
you can get out of bed with minimal assistance,
oxygen needs are low,
there are no signs of infection,
and bowel function has returned.
Home care visits are arranged
for most patients to minimize problems
during this transition to home.
Some patients cannot discharge to home
and need more assistance to gain strength
and be able to care for themselves.
Our team will recommend the most
optimal discharge plan for you.
Recovery from heart surgery is your responsibility.
Recovery can be a challenge for the patient and family.
It can also be rewarding
giving one a new lease on life.
It is your responsibility to take control
and initiate lifestyle changes
that will maintain health.